To be discussed : official app catalog policy (#2559)
YunoHost/doc: pages/06.contribute/10.packaging_apps/90.policy/policy.md

---
title: YunoHost's policy regarding the apps included in the official catalog
template: docs
taxonomy:
    category: docs
routes:
  default: '/packaging_policy'
---

### License

The rule of thumb is that we only include software licensed under a free-software license in the official app catalog.

> However, as YunoHost evolved, some gray-cases appeared with softwares that would be relevant for YunoHost's goal and match its spirit, while not being strictly-speaking free-software. Situations such as:
> 
> - software promoting the use of centralized services, though precisely to avoid their direct usage ;
> - software relying on non-free dependencies or assets ;
> - "new" post-open-source / ethical-yet-not-free licenses such as the [ACSL](https://anticapitalist.software/), the [HL3](https://firstdonoharm.dev/) or the [CoopCycle License](https://github.com/coopcycle/coopcycle-web/blob/master/LICENSE) ;
> - "open-core" models, trademark clauses, or business-related license clauses (such as the BSL) which are meant to ensure the project's sustainability while still remaining ethical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As YunoHost grew, some gray area cases appeared with software that would be relevant for [YunoHost's goal](#what-s-yunohost-goal) and match its spirit, while not being strictly-speaking free-software. These applications may be:

- promoting the use of centralized services, though precisely to avoid their direct usage ;
- relying on non-free dependencies or assets ;
- released under "new" post-open-source or ethical-yet-not-free licenses such as the [ACSL](https://anticapitalist.software/), the [HL3](https://firstdonoharm.dev/) or the [CoopCycle License](https://github.com/coopcycle/coopcycle-web/blob/master/LICENSE) ;
- released under "open-core" models, trademark clauses, or business-related license clauses (such as the BSL) which are meant to ensure the project's sustainability while remaining ethical.
```

The project therefore allows the inclusion inside the official app catalog, ***on a case-by-case basis***, of apps which does not qualify as "free software", yet considered to be ethical and worthy of interest for [YunoHost's goal](#what-s-yunohost-goal). Such apps are tagged in the catalog, such that an explicit message displayed before their installation.

If you notice an app is missing such a tag/disclaimer, feel free to open a discussion or pull requet on [the app catalog](https://github.com/YunoHost/apps/).

If you run YunoHost for your business, you are responsible for doing your due diligence by checking the licenses of the software you want to install on your server.

### Nature of the app

In addition, the YunoHost team decided to not include apps in the official catalog if they:
- are overly complex to deploy or resource-hungry compared to their features ; 
- only apply to super niche use cases ;
- promote cryptocurrencies ;
- promote AI for purposes deemed futile compared to the ecological cost involved behind the scenes ;
- promote shady activities such as tracking/stalking people.

> The team may make exceptions to these criteria on a case-by-case basis. The team may also amend this list with other criteria in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The team may make exceptions to these criteria on a case-by-case basis, on its own volition. Debates and nitpicking may most likely not be welcomed. The team may also amend this list with other criteria in the future.
```

> The team may make exceptions to these criterias on a case-by-case basis. The team may also amend this list with other criterias in the future.

Author: (this bit is the main new stuff to be discussed)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Nature of the app

In addition, the YunoHost team decided to not include apps in the official catalog if they:
- are overly complex to deploy or resource-hungry compared to their features ; 
- only apply to super niche use cases ;
- promote cryptocurrencies ;
- promote AI for purposes deemed futile compared to the ecological cost involved behind the scenes ;
- promote shady activities such as tracking/stalking people.

The team may make exceptions to these criteria on a case-by-case basis. The team may also amend this list with other criteria in the future.
```

Reviewer: (gadgety is actually a false friend 😅)

Reviewer: I've fixed some typos and phrasing. Onto the rest of the commit. :)

### What to do if you're not happy with these criterias

> These previous criterias does not mean that apps cannot be created, just that they won't be included in the official catalog. You can manually install specific repo using `yunohost app install <url_to_git_repo_ynh>` or even creating and adding a custom catalog source with in `/etc/yunohost/apps_catalog.yml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These editorial choices do not mean that apps infringing them cannot be created, merely that they won't be included in the official catalog.
You are free to:
- [Develop your own application packages](/packaging_apps) (though support may be limited due to aforementioned criteria)
- Manually install any application by using `yunohost app install <url_to_git_repo_ynh>`
- Create and add a custom catalog source within `/etc/yunohost/apps_catalog.yml`
```

The project therefore allows the inclusion inside the official app catalog, ***on a case-by-case basis***, of apps which does not qualify as "free software", yet considered to be ethical and worthy of interest for [YunoHost's goal](#what-s-yunohost-goal). Such apps are tagged in the catalog, such that an explicit message displayed before their installation.

If you notice an app is missing such a tag/disclaimer, feel free to open a discussion or pull requet on [the app catalog](https://github.com/YunoHost/apps/).

If you run YunoHost for your business, you are responsible for doing your due diligence by checking the licenses of the software you want to install on your server.

### Nature of the app

In addition, the YunoHost team decided to not include apps in the official catalog if they:
- are overly complex to deploy or resource-hungry compared to their features ; 
- only apply to super niche use cases ;
- promote cryptocurrencies ;

> - promote AI for purposes deemed futile compared to the ecological cost involved behind the scenes ;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- promote AI for purposes deemed futile compared to the ecological and sociological costs involved behind the scenes ;
```

- promote shady activities such as tracking/stalking people.

> The team may make exceptions to these criteria on a case-by-case basis, on its own volition. Debates and nitpicking may most likely not be welcomed. The team may also amend this list with other criteria in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The team may make exceptions to these criteria on a case-by-case basis, on its own volition. The team may also amend this list with other criteria in the future.
```
If it seems obvious to us , it could not be the case for everybody. I think some people needs debate or outreach to understand those concepts.
